the rowing program at Yale is quite a
sophisticated operation on an earlier
installment of inside yay laughs let
expositor by Under Armour we took you
inside the crew tanks inside Payne
Whitney Jim show you what the teams do
to work out when it's cold outside but
now that the weather is getting nice the
teams could come out and row out here on
the Housatonic River and they have just
a facility to get themselves ready at
the Gilder boathouse
welcome to the Gilder boathouse in Derby
Connecticut on the Housatonic River the
lead donors are Richard Gilder and Ginny
Gilder jenny was also an olympian of a
major woman in the history of our
program when Ginny was at Yale she
participated in what is known as our
infamously or famously known as the
strip at Yale
the women's team did not have the
facilities at the Bob Cook boathouse
that they needed there were no showers
they would have to wait on the bus cold
and wet after practice while the men
showered and then ride the bus home so
in order to protest they went into the
associate athletic director's office
stripped and had title 9 written on
their bodies and read a letter of
protest to the associate logic director
within two weeks Yale quickly fixed the
problem at the boathouse and and brought
the women's facilities slowly up to
speed now flash forward to this board
house where everything in this boathouse
is equal so the square footage is
divided exactly equal between men and
women
our boat house is located ten miles from
campus which is about a 20-minute bus
ride so time is of the essence for every
Yale student when you're going to a
world-class University taking classes at
a nuclear level time is of the essence
so every second of your day matters so
the lockers are set up and configured so
that we are easy to flow
lots of space between them so people
aren't bumping into each other as they
change open front lockers so that
there's airflow with a mesh back so that
everything comes and goes clean in and
out
we have laundry service every other day
but still wet clothing from rowing can
need to dry it needs to get dry as we
come through here the back is the shower
area which is again set up open space 18
shower heads so that we can get in and
out in a timely manner this is our Wall
of Fame it's one of the first things you
see when you walk into the locker room
on this wall our crews that have either
won a national championship in eastern
sprints IV championship or what we call
the Hyp championship so over the course
of time from the beginning the first
crew all the way down the wall to the
most recent crew and every athlete in
our program wants to get their picture
on this wall one of the great traditions
in this locker room like many locker
rooms is on the way out the door you got
to smack the sign ours is row like a
champion reminds us to do our best every
day we are in the trophy room at the
Gilder boathouse we will watch video on
any given day break down practice video
here on the large screen we'll have team
banquets here we'll have alumni
reception here one of the greatest
features of this boathouse is that it's
located on the finish line of our Race
Course so that on race day is like this
coming weekend this room will be filled
with spectators and we stream our races
live so that on the 90 inch plasma
screen will watch the first 1500 meters
of the race the parents will watch it
and as the race is approached they're
able to walk out onto the deck through
the sliders and cheer on their their
team
and see the finish right across as the
crews finish here at the boathouse now
we're down in the bow phase the heart
and soul of every boathouse
in this boathouse we have approximately
sixty votes
varying sizes from singles doubles quads
meaning four people up to eight what we
need to have is what's called a double
fleet of boats so when we compete at the
NCAA championship stay in Sacramento
California we have to send our boats on
a trailer five days in advance
so that we put our racing boats on the
trailer ship them out and then we have a
another set of boats that are identical
for the ones we shipped out to practice
in for five days so that we can keep our
rhythm and keep the same feel so your
average eight runs about forty-five to
fifty thousand dollars depending on the
specs of the boat your average four runs
around twenty-five to thirty thousand
dollars and your average pair runs about
fifteen to twenty thousand dollars per
boat and a given practice will put for
eight worth of athletes on the water so
we'll take this whole set of this whole
side of wars will go out on the water
indenture request of the Gilder family
when they built this boat house was to
establish a community rowing program and
it's been one of the greatest things to
watch in the summer Yale opens up this
boat house to the Naugatuck Valley
community and the New Haven community
and about 700 kids from ages eight to
high school age have access to come to
Yale to the boathouse getting a barge
learn about the sport of rowing and see
if they like it it's been a great
program it's been in place since the
boathouse opened in 2000 and in fact we
did have an athlete row on our team at
Yale who came up through the community
rowing program and then got into Yale
and came and rode on
prove to like everything else at the
Gilder boathouse the boat bays are built
for speed and total efficiency so double
wide bay allows us to efficiently launch
our shells come right out here this is a
quarter acre of dock so that when we
mask launch men women everybody at once
we can come right out and get all of our
boats right on the water and the most
time-efficient way possible when you
take into account the Gilder boathouse
the amount of space we have out here
combined it with the three rowing tanks
and the Payne Whitney gym and then the
boathouse at Gale Sperry with the
sleeping quarters Yale has the most
square footage of growing facilities in
the country hands down the birthplace of
rowing it's only right that it should be
that way
[Music]